[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Alison, I'm so
happy to be talking to
you because dentistry
is so confusing these days.
We don't know what
we're supposed to do,
not supposed to do.
And as you can see,
your book, your book
is "The Natural Recovery
Plan" is well dog eared.
I've done my research here.
And let's start out
with a general theme
that really involves your
own personal history, which
was the inspiration.
You're a dentist,
you're a naturopath,
and you're a kinesiologist.
You know how body systems
work both biologically and
energetically.
So let's start with your own
story and what happened to you.
>>ALISON ADAMS: Well, I
was born into a family
with a big history of
autoimmune disease,
although I didn't kind of
reflect upon that until later
on in life.
All my family were
always allergic to things
and had trouble with foods,
and that sort of thing.
And I didn't consider it at
all unusual to be that way.
My health was never good
right from an early age.
I had digestive problems
from really the get go.
I had musculo-skeletal problems.
I was referred to physiotherapy
and all those sorts of things.
When I was about five
and I went through 12,
until the age of about 12
I had leg braces at night.
Horrible physiotherapy now.
I look back on what they did
and I think it was just cruel
and I don't think it make
any difference either.
I've also have hearing problems.
I'm deaf in one ear.
I started on that whole process.
When I was about 10 I
had my first operation
and I went on to
have, I think, 19--
>>REGINA: 19 operations
for your hearing?
>>ADAMS: Ear operations, yes.
All of which was
addressing the symptom
but never addressing
the cause, I now see.
Anyway.
So time went by.
I then hit puberty and my
health took a distinct turn
for the worse.
>>REGINA: How could
it get much worse?
>>ADAMS: I mean,
just menstruation.
The whole menstrual cycle,
PMT, bloating all the time.
I barely felt normal.
I felt normal for a few days
in the middle of the month,
and then the whole
cycle would kick off.
To which the doctors' answers
were to put me on the pill
when I was very young, about 16.
But then it became so I
couldn't get off the pill
because it was so
horrendous when I did.
So I got stuck in that and
I took it for way too long,
really.
When I was inducted
to university,
they actually check
all dental students
to make sure that their
dental care is OK.
And I was found to have been
neglected by my hometown
dentist.
So I actually had about
13 amalgam fillings
done in the space of
three months or something
when I first started
at dental school.
>>REGINA: What do you mean,
you first had them done?
>>ADAMS: I had got decay
that had never been treated.
>>REGINA: 13?
And then they put the
mercury fillings in?
>>ADAMS: Yes.
>>REGINA: At one time?
>>REGINA: Oh, goodness.
>>ADAMS: It went in very
short space of time,
in a period of a few months.
And on and off,
there's been a history
throughout my life of systems
just going down for no reason,
really.
And it wasn't till I
just really hit a wall.
I actually had a whole
series of miscarriages.
At that point I really
kind of looked around me
at what had been
going on in my family.
And I realized my
paternal grandmother
died when she was
about 42, which
was the age I was when all
this started really happening.
My paternal aunt, she
died at 50 of lupus.
My cousin's in a wheelchair.
She's got a lupus type.
She had juvenile
arthritis and so forth.
So casting around my family I
thought, this isn't just me.
There's something going on here.
Anyway, a set of circumstances
brought me into training
as a naturopath.
It wasn't at all
what I had planned,
but it's what I had
to do to get well.
Anyway, I went to see this lady.
And she put a wheat
vial on my belly,
which are little test tubes,
really, with a vibration.
And I went down like
a pack of cards.
And then she'd put other
things on and I'd be strong.
And I just came away,
didn't know what she'd done.
But I knew that it was real,
what she was doing was real.
So that launched me into an
investigation of what was it,
how did it work?
And I enrolled on the
course she'd done.
I then went to do Touch
For Health to augment that
and got completely
hooked on kinesiology.
>>REGINA: So do I take it
that as a result of what
your findings were
going to the naturopath,
going to the
kinesiologist, you were
able to recover enough
strength that you could go back
to school and then
do this continuing
education into these new areas?
>>ADAMS: Yes, I mean the school,
most of it was home study.
And you do one weekend a
month or something like that,
and case studies.
So yes.
I was following all the
naturopathic-- at that point
I had really stepped out of
the allopathic camp completely.
One of the things that was
a turning point for me was I
did a liver flush.
And I wasn't sure about
this thing at all.
But I was absolutely
shocked what came out.
And I thought, OK.
Right.
Well, this is true.
What they're saying
is true here.
So after that I was prepared
to really give it a go.
And I knew allopathic
medicine had
nothing to offer
me at that stage.
And so I just
spent a lot of time
really cleaning myself
up, doing liver flushes,
doing clay baths,
taking Chlorella.
And yes, I did.
I recovered to the point
where I could study.
But I became really fascinated
by the people who don't really
respond to these
treatments terribly well.
And that took me into, I did
an autonomic response testing
course with Dietrich Klinghardt.
And what he does, he's a
physician and a neurobiologist.
And he's got a technique
that uncovers hidden toxins.
And once you have that
technique under your belt,
you will find toxic metals
in everybody, just everybody.
So that then became
my fascination.
And that was the first layer.
I got my amalgam fillings out.
Then I learned a
little more and decided
I needed to get the other
metals out of my mouth.
And I did that.
And it's all been
a bit of a process.
Now I know more
about root canals,
I think I've really got to get
my root canal filled teeth out,
and I'm working on
that at the moment.
So yes.
I didn't intend, but
I've been brought back
full circle to dentistry and
how important it is in health.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I mean, what a journey.
How exhausting.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: It's just, listening
to it, it's like, oh my God.
What a life.
Thank God you were able to
get the proper information
and recover yourself.
I mean, forget what you're
doing to help the rest of us.
I'm glad you're back.
So OK.
Now from there, going
back to your background
in dentistry and then
also holistic medicine.
We're going to look at the
mouth and the being, the body,
as a whole system.
And let's start with the mouth.
First the intelligence
in the body,
the way it's utilized through
the meridians of the body,
and then how that's impacted.
We all know about reflexology.
Most people.
We have these meridian
endings in our feet.
And many people know we
have them in our hands,
and even in our ears.
But let's take it to the mouth.
What's going on there with
the meridians in the body?
>>ADAMS: Well, it's a
completely different system.
And I think if you come into
it with the allopathic way
of thinking, it will make
no sense to you at all.
>>REGINA: So let's
say we're going
with the Asian understanding,
its roots in China and Japan.
And let's say we're going
to be looking at the body
as this matrix of these
energetic meridians running
through that are feeding vital
information to all systems
and organs.
>>ADAMS: Well, the difference
is that allopathic medicine
regards the body as a
thing, as a solid thing,
and we're all separate.
And they look at
biochemical pathways
and all this sort of thing.
The energy medicine way
of looking at the body
is it's not a thing at all.
It's condensed energy.
And that's what
Einstein's E equals
mc squared told us
over a century ago now.
But that hasn't been absorbed
into the practice of medicine
at all.
What the Chinese and
Indian philosophies say
is that we have a series of
chakras which are transducers,
which greatly reduce down
universal energies into what
we perceive as
being the physical.
The energy is then circulated
around the meridian.
You've got two
central meridians that
run up and down the
middle of the body, which
are reservoir meridians.
And they feed into 12
bilateral meridians
which actually animate
all the organs.
They come near surface, as you
say, in the ear and the feet
and the hands and the face.
>>REGINA: And this
has, by the way,
been quantified in
the world of science.
In the '80s I interviewed
Jean Claude De Ross,
the man who did the
original experiments
that the Asian acupuncturists
were so thrilled to see.
I wouldn't have wanted to
be the subject necessarily,
but he shot radioactive
isotopes-- very, very low
dosages-- into the
meridians and then they
watched it migrate through the
body and captured that on film.
And it was the first time
anyone had seen these meridians
in action and how quickly
the energy moves compared
to the blood flow in
nearby veins and such.
So I just wanted to say this
has been validated medically.
>>ADAMS: It's been
validated a number of times.
And I found some images the
other day, which maybe you'll
be able to put on
the site, of they'd
used a very sensitive
photon capture technique.
And they'd also used--
oh, I can't remember
what it's called, where
you heat the little pellets
on the skin using acupuncture.
>>REGINA: Moxibustion?
>>ADAMS: Moxi-- moxi-- moxa.
And you can see absolutely
that the meridians are showing
up brilliantly and
absolutely accurately.
They're absolutely spot on.
>>REGINA: It's wonderful
these experiments have
been done to start proving
this so we can take it out
of the range of belief systems.
>>ADAMS: Yes.
No, it's there.
And you know, I mean a lot
of dentists who use this,
it's been proven to
them in their work.
They've just seen the results.
As you say, there's
kind of examples.
One example, a very
strong connection
seems to be between
one of what you
call second bicuspid or second
pre molar tooth and the breast
cancer.
So the problem is
that anything--
all the meridians go
through the teeth and all
the sockets of the teeth.
And any kind of
blockage there, any kind
of galvanic action there, any
kind of necrosis or disease
will affect the other
organs on that meridian.
And the converse is also true.
So that if you were having a
grumbling appendix or something
like that, it may result
in a tooth devitalizing
for no seeming reason,
becoming hot and cold sensitive
and dying, whatever.
And if you can recognize
what's causing what,
you can actually
resolve the issue.
>>REGINA: It's a lot to start
taking in when you really
do you get that this body
is a whole living system.
And we treat the mouth as though
it's something very mechanical.
We treat the whole body
in allopathic medicine
as though it's mechanistic.
But it's particularly the teeth.
We haven't thought anything
of going in and having
someone get their
[DRILL SOUNDS]
their drill out and
going at our teeth.
We don't think of it as being
vital, but something dead,
you know?
But in fact, let's
talk about the living
organism of the
mouth and how that's
interacting with our
own biochemistry.
>>ADAMS: Well, the mouth
is crucially important.
And what's happened is
over the last century
or so there's arisen these
two completely different--
so you've got the
medics on the one hand
who, they spend very little
time learning about the mouth.
And a lot of them don't even
bother going to that lecture,
to be honest.
They always seem to prescribe
either painkillers or--
>>REGINA: When you
said medics, you're
speaking about medical doctors.
>>ADAMS: Yes.
Medical doctors, yeah.
So they will just pass
you off to the dentist
if it's something beyond
their understanding.
And then of course
dentists are kind of
really focused on doing the
technical job, which is hard.
It's a really hard
job of dentistry.
And they're not really
looking at the longer term
effect of what they're doing.
Maybe what happened to the
patient six, nine months,
two years after they did that
crown filling, bridge implant,
took that tooth out or whatever.
So a lot of people just
aren't joining the dots.
But the people who
are skilled and who
are conversant with this
say that at least 70% to 90%
of disease originates in the
mouth or has some element.
>>REGINA: 70% to 90%.
And those are real stats.
This isn't just to favor the
holistic dentistry industry?
>>ADAMS: No.
I mean, I think it
started out as being 70%.
There were people
like Reinhold Voll,
who developed-- he was
a German physician who
developed electroacupuncture.
But there's a
dentist in naturopath
called Gerald Smith and
others like him are actually
upping it and saying,
when you really
understand what's
going on, it's 90%.
So it's important for
all sorts of reasons.
Important for
structural reasons.
It's important because
it's a real big center
of toxicity in the body.
It's important because
of the meridians.
the lymphatic circulation
goes straight to the thyroid.
The blood circulation
goes straight
from the mouth to the heart.
Nobody's seen the big
picture and connected.
>>REGINA: OK.
Well, we also put
lot of food in there.
>>ADAMS: We do.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: So let's start there
with what we put in our bodies.
Because a lot of this
ends up as toxicity.
A lot of it ends up as
bacteria in our mouths.
Let's talk about the
process of decay, OK?
>>ADAMS: OK.
Well, there's the
conventional version,
which has the advantage
of being very simple.
And you can probably describe
it in one sentence which
is that bacteria
adhere to the teeth,
particularly a bacteria
called streptococcus mutans.
They ferment the carbohydrates
and sugars in food
and they create
acids that dissolves
the enamel of the tooth.
And once that's been
penetrated, then the bacteria
can actually invade
the body of the tooth,
the dentin of the tooth.
>>REGINA: Now let's
get the long version.
>>ADAMS: So that's the
fermentation theory,
bacterial fermentation.
The longer question is quite
a lot more complicated.
And it's called the
proteolysis chelation theory.
And a number of
people have done work
on this that's all been
sort of confirmatory
over quite a long
period of time.
And a lot of this work was
done a century or 50, 60,
70 years ago, but
was disregarded.
And because the whole
bacterial fermentation
theory first of all doesn't
really hang together.
Firstly they may be grouping
a number of different diseases
and calling them decay.
So that may be a
different disease process.
Like they group everything
together and call it cancer.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>ADAMS: Well, they may be
completely different processes.
So right off the bat.
There's other things like,
yes, sugar does cause decay.
But you can inject it into
somebody under their skin
or into their veins, whatever,
and it'll still cause decay.
So it's not actually
the topical effect
that's causing the decay.
>>REGINA: Is that
because it's creating
an acidic condition in the body?
>>ADAMS: Well, it's a little
bit more complicated than that.
You need to understand
a little bit
about the structure
of the tooth first,
which is that there
are three layers.
There's the outer
enamel which is mostly
hydroxyapatite crystals with
a little bit of protein.
But that's sort
of 98% inorganic.
So that's a kind of
protective outer coat.
Then you've got the dentin
beneath that, which is actually
made up of lots of tubules.
And these tubules are actually
maintained and serviced
by cells called
odontoblasts, which
are the cells that
actually created
the dentin in first place,
in the baby in the womb.
And they actually act as the
circulation for the dentin.
So they are
delivering nutrients,
they're taking away
toxic waste, they're
repairing the tooth in service.
So any micro cracks
or anything like
that is actually
being maintained.
So what they found is that decay
doesn't start from the outside
in.
It actually starts
with the odontoblasts
being adversely affected
by blood chemistry.
The odontoblasts are actually
the most metabolically active
cells in the body,
and they also work
at very high osmotic pressures.
So any change from the
homeostatic kind of balance
will affect the teeth first.
So what actually
happens is-- and it's
a little bit complicated-- but
the film of bacteria and food
that forms on the
outside of the tooth
communicates with the
odontoblasts inside the tooth
through electrostatic
mechanisms.
And what you actually
get is you get overwhelm
of the odontoblasts,
which are very sensitive,
and they die first.
And then when there
is no defense, when
there is no kind of metabolic
shields defending the tooth,
then the bacteria can
come into the tooth.
>>REGINA: I see.
>>ADAMS: And work
done by Ralph Steinman
showed that there were
actually fluid flows in health.
There's fluid flows
out through the dentin
out through the enamel.
And he's shown this by
injecting radioactive substances
into rats' stomachs
and things like that.
And they'll appear
on the surface
of the enamel within an hour.
So there's an active circulation
out through the tooth.
That is actually casting off
bacteria, protecting the tooth,
protecting it from decay,
protecting it from gum disease.
In ill health-- and the
decay is just an early sign
of ill health-- the
fluid flows reverse.
And everything gets
sucked into the tooth
and the tooth can no
longer defend itself.
So that's the
alternative theory,
so say which is the
proteolysis and chelation.
>>REGINA: And this is highly
individual in another way
as well in that some
bodies seem to be
almost immune to
any kind of decay.
Some families, no one in
the family has had a cavity.
Which, our family
was the opposite.
By the time we were five
years old, all of us
were in the dental chair.
And is that a difference
in our blood chemistry
then that's going on?
>>ADAMS: It's hard to
know whether what you're
looking at there is
dietary or genetics.
When you look back there
was-- and perhaps you'll
come to this-- but
there was a researcher
called Weston Price,
Dr. Weston Price.
>>REGINA: We are going to
get to that, definitely.
>>ADAMS: He's a dentist.
And he did a huge
amount of research.
But he did a lot of research on
indigenous people in the 1930s.
And he found practically no
decay or gum disease at all
in these people.
And let's not forget, they had
no toothbrush, no toothpaste.
They weren't flossing.
They'd never seen a dentist.
They had no access
to any of this stuff.
And yet, they were going
through their entire lives
with straight,
white, healthy teeth.
No gum disease.
They were reproducing
children who
would accommodate all
their teeth just fine.
So we've come badly off track.
And what he showed was the
effect of the Western diet
was catastrophic.
And the pictures are really
quite hard to countenance.
>>REGINA: Oh, when
a Western diet
was introduced to
indigenous cultures.
It was really quite terrible.
>>ADAMS: Just devastating.
Gum disease, tooth decay.
So none of these
things are normal.
We've come think to think
of them as being normal,
but they're really
not our native state.
>>REGINA: No.
And in fact, I remember
reading in your more recent
online book.
You were stating that suicides
within this indigenous culture
that he was specifically
looking at were almost 100%
dental related.
They'd never had that
kind of pain before.
And if they did not have
somebody passing through who
could help them
with it, with now
the need for modern
dentistry, people
would actually kill
themselves over the tooth
pain and infection.
>>ADAMS: Pitiful pictures of
children with bandaged faces
and people with
draining and infections
coming out through their neck.
>>REGINA: All introduced because
of the refined Western diet
which was high in sugars,
high in carbohydrates.
And I would assume prior to
that, their diets natively
were high in a lot of
plants, for example,
and also some proteins
from whatever animals
were in the region?
>>ADAMS: Yeah, so he went
to all sorts of places.
He went to Labrador, Melanesia,
and the Outer Hebrides
in Scotland and the
Lotschental Valley
in Switzerland and
Africa and Australia.
So a huge disparity.
But what he found
was that-- and he
was trying to look
for the common things
that united all these
people-- and what he found
was that they all
ate fresh foods.
They all, without exception,
ate animal foods as well.
And organ meats, fish.
>>REGINA: Fresh dairy.
Unadulterated dairies and fats.
>>ADAMS: Some of them did.
Some of them didn't.
But there was a lot more
fat in the diet, yes.
And there were other
things as well.
But he did actually
specifically look
for vegetarian, exclusively
vegetarian tribes.
And there were some he found
that ate a lot of vegetables.
But even then, they
went to a lot of trouble
to get some crab from
neighboring tribes or whatever,
supplement with
something like that.
So he actually took samples,
took them back home,
analyzed them, and found that
the-- and this is compared
to the diet in the
1930s, all right?
So this is not
compared to the diet
now-- that there was 10 times
the fat, soluble vitamins
in their diet that there was in
the 1930s in the Western diet
and four times as many
water soluble vitamins.
And that the fat soluble
vitamins were crucial,
particularly one he called
Activator X, which they now
think is vitamin K2, was
essential for the utilization
of minerals in the body.
>>REGINA: So what you're
saying, I mean, there
is a move toward on
one hand-- I mean,
everybody's going
into the various niche
diets that are available.
But the whole paleo
diet, which is
a return to kind of
meat and vegetables,
more or less, that's one
popular one coming up.
And would you say
that that more closely
resembled what he was finding
out in the field compared
to-- obviously we
have all raw diets.
We have vegetarian.
I was a vegetarian
for 20 years myself
until I started having
some health issues.
And each one of these going
on, is that paleo diet
the closest to?
>>ADAMS: I think so, yes.
I mean, I was vegetarian
too for quite a long time.
And I look back now
and think that was
a big part of the problem.
Also I think some of this may
be a red herring in that if you
look at kirlian photographs of
food, what these people were
eating was fresh.
>>REGINA: It was alive.
>>ADAMS: Fresh, living food.
So almost irrespective
of what the food was.
It had been harvested
that day, you know?
>>REGINA: Well, I
wonder what that
would mean for more
of a raw diet then?
Because a lot of
people are moving
toward raw diets in general.
Usually that means
vegetarianism.
Sometimes not.
Some people are eating steak
tartare and raw fish, ceviche
and things like that.
And I can't remember
the name of that right
off hand, what it's called.
But nonetheless, all
raw foods including
the animal kingdom,
and raw dairy.
Cream for example.
So maybe it looked a little
more like that in some ways.
>>ADAMS: Very much so.
And his recommendations were
organ meats, meat, fish, eggs,
cod liver oil, high
vitamin butter,
which is very yellow butter.
It's butter that's
been made from cows
that have been fed on
actively growing pastures.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Grass fed.
Which exists.
You can buy it.
>>ADAMS: Yeah.
No refined anything, really.
He did actually go
with wheat, but it
had to be freshly milled.
No alcohol.
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: That's a shame
for down at the pub now,
isn't it here?
[LAUGHTER]
>>REGINA: But then also,
let's talk about Britain.
And America is not
that different.
You're talking
about toast and tea
for breakfast, or toast
and coffee, as it were.
And in America you run by
Starbucks and pick up a pastry
and a venti latte
where you're talking
about milk and maybe two
or three shots of espresso
and then a muffin to
go, all wheat based.
>>ADAMS: Yes.
I think if you look back
at evolutionary biology,
our ancestors--
Australopithecus has been around
for four million years.
And one of the things
that Weston Price did
was he looked at the
archaeological records.
And you just see, he just
didn't find any traces
of tooth crowding, decay,
gum disease, et cetera.
Generation on generation
on generation,
they'd reproduced beautifully.
So you're looking
at-- homo sapiens
has been around
for 200,000 years.
Dairy and grains were introduced
about 10,000 years ago.
So really I think it's 330
generations or something
like that, which just
isn't that long ago.
And the effects he
was showing, I mean,
these were really
devitalized food.
Which is partly why, in
order to transport things
to the colonies and
that sort of thing,
they needed to keep the
flour free of weevils.
So you think, well, if the
weevils didn't want to eat it,
if they didn't perceive
it as being food,
perhaps it was no good
for the humans either.
But what was he found was there
was gross distortions in growth
once the Western diet arrived.
>>REGINA: Jaws.
Malformed jaws.
>>ADAMS: Really malformed jaws.
I mean, we are a freak show
unfortunately in the West.
>>REGINA: And it really
shouldn't be that way.
When you look at the
Weston Price photographs
of these various
indigenous cultures,
you see these beautiful,
gleaming, full mouths
of white teeth.
>>ADAMS: Yes.
So we've got several problems.
One is that what he found was
that particularly the mid third
of the face was affected.
So the upper jaw didn't
develop as it should.
And really the whole
upper and lower jaw
should develop as a complex,
as a dentoalveolar complex.
And it should all kind of grow
together and mesh together.
And what happens is that when
the contact between the two
systems, the upper and
lower jaw are lost,
you get all sorts
of malformations.
The tongue drops
out of the palate
and doesn't push
the teeth sideways
so you get growth in length in
the face rather than in width.
Typically we get crowding.
A lot of people get
crowding, for which
they need to have
some teeth extracted
and have orthodontics.
And then later they may need
to have their wisdom teeth out.
You also get other
things like the rib cages
weren't fully developing.
The pelvis wasn't
fully developing
so that was having
implications for childbirth.
And there was a lot
of evidence that when
the agriculture was introduced,
that the neonatal death
rate just went through the roof.
>>REGINA: Because of the
malformation of the pelvis?
>>ADAMS: That's the
supposition, yes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I mean, I find it
absolutely fascinating.
This journey of
the mouth is really
taking us through our own
kind of biological history
and the distortion of it
through modern agriculture.
>>ADAMS: I think a lot of people
make it awfully complicated.
And in my simple
brain, I just have
to think, well, what we did
for two million years, that
can't have been that wrong.
>>REGINA: I mean,
surely we're not
designed to all have orthodontic
work by the time we're
12 years old.
>>ADAMS: Absolutely not.
No.
>>REGINA: That shouldn't be the
condition of the human species.
>>ADAMS: And what we've come
to think of as normal-- gum
disease, 80% of us
have gum disease.
98% of us affected
by tooth decay.
And that's got all sort of
knock on effects as well.
All of these
things, orthodontics
as you say, that we come
to think of as normal,
none of it's normal.
Arthritis, none of this.
>>REGINA: And we're going to
do get into all of these ways
in which we try to
fix the problems
and what those effects are.
We're going to take
a little break.
But the other thing
I want to talk to you
about is, what is normal?
Some people feel
that they should
go through the entire lifetime
and have a full set of teeth
and want them to be as perfect
as they were in their twenties.
And we're going to find
out when we come back,
is that actually a normal state?
So we'll be back
in just a minute.
So we were just talking about
what is normal with teeth.
What should we expect as
we go throughout our lives
and we go through
the process of aging?
Are we supposed to drop
a few along the way?
How many?
So let's talk about what
is normal for human beings.
I mean, we know what's normal
kind of for cats and dogs,
but they're eating a garbage
diet for the most part
too of canned foods
and devitalized foods.
So we can't necessarily
look to them
who lose their teeth most of the
time if they live into old age
to see what we're
supposed to be like.
So tell us what we're
supposed to have going on.
>>ADAMS: Well, interesting
you mentioned that,
because there was a researcher,
Francis Pottenger, who
looked at cats.
And he looked at cats
that ate raw meat
and unpasteurized milk.
And he compared
them to cats that
ate cat food and
pasteurized milk, which
is what most domestic
cats would be given.
And over a series of
generations, the cats that
were on the raw milk
and the raw meat,
they remained vital and healthy.
And the other ones, generation
on generation deteriorated.
So the second generation
became chronically sick.
The third generation
became unable to reproduce.
And that's what we're
seeing in humans,
but you see it in
an accelerated form
I think in cats because they
have a lesser life span.
So I think it's difficult.
Because for people
like you and me,
we've already been
on the receiving
end of a lot of these treatments
and the diet of our youth
and what have you.
I think for any parents
out there watching
or would be parents,
I think if you
can plan it right from
the start and get yourself
cleaned up and sorted out before
you even think about conceiving
and then eat a really top notch
diet all through pregnancy
and when the child
is young as well,
really go easy on the
breads and the pastries
and that sort of
thing, the sugar.
Because they will learn,
what's normal will
be what you feed them
really and certainly
until they go to school.
So I think with
that generation also
give them the cod liver
oil and the butter.
You can also use Chlorella
Growth Factor in children
as well.
That helps their jaws
to develop and seems
to provide some
protection against some--
>>REGINA: What is
that called again?
>>ADAMS: Chlorella
Growth Factor.
CGF sometimes.
>>REGINA: Growth factor, yes.
OK.
>>ADAMS: Yeah.
So I would really
keep up with that.
You also need to work on
the tooth brushing and all
that sort of thing as well.
>>REGINA: Right.
But let's say now, here we are.
We've been through the typical
Western diet of our youth
and we've cleaned it up here
and there along the way.
What should we normally expect?
If let's say we are on,
we've been on a proper diet--
in fact, let's go to
the indigenous cultures.
Because you do see people
in indigenous cultures
without teeth.
It's not as though all
of them have their teeth
right in through their old age.
So what is normal to
have happen to our mouths
as we age if we're eating
properly and feeding ourselves
properly?
>>ADAMS: Well, yes.
I mean, Weston Price
didn't document that when
he went to these indigenous
tribes that really
had no contact with the
Western diet at all.
And he took tens of
thousands of slides.
Just a really
meticulous researcher.
I think those people
that you're talking about
have probably had some
contact with the West,
otherwise we probably wouldn't
have encountered them much.
It's also hard, as I say, there
was all the skeletal records
and things where he was,
just generation on generation
of these beautifully
reproduced skulls and jaws.
And it's hard to know what
age those people died at.
So they may not have
lived to the great old age
that we're living to.
>>REGINA: True.
They could have looked to be
80 when they were only 50.
So taking that
into consideration,
just sort of a best guess.
And I know this is
highly individual.
I know that we have our own
bodies and our own blood
environment to
take into account.
But if we were feeding
ourselves properly,
should we be losing our teeth?
And what percentage
of teeth would
be considered kind
of a normal loss rate
by the time we hit our later
years, our senior years,
for example?
>>ADAMS: People tend to look
to the Aborigines and things
like that, because
they are really
kind of a prehistoric
culture that's
fairly much intact still.
And they tend to
keep their teeth.
Their teeth get very
worn because they
eat a very gritty diet.
They're eating insects and bugs
and roots and things like that.
But I see no reason why you
shouldn't keep your teeth.
>>REGINA: So we
should keep our teeth?
>>ADAMS: We really should.
It shouldn't be a normal
thing to be losing your teeth.
But then again, what my
generation of dentists
have been taught is to keep
the teeth at all costs, really.
>>REGINA: Right.
And that's the part
we're getting into.
So I wanted to know
kind of, what's normal?
And you can't tell what's
normal, because each one of us
has had a distorted
diet, virtually
everyone watching this.
I mean, there are people who
are watching this right now,
some of our audience have
gone to great lengths
to recover their health.
And as I said, they're on
raw diets, paleo diets,
macrobiotic, vegetarian,
and so forth.
But usually that has come
later in life for many people.
It hasn't been all
the way through.
So we've encountered
some kind of tooth decay.
And now we're in the
process of trying
to fix the damage
that's been done.
And there is a wide variety
of options available now,
and I wanted to go
through some of them.
First of all, let's talk
about the smoking gun
or in this case,
the smoking tooth.
And we need to roll a little bit
of video over this right now.
And this is showing amalgam
that is offing its gases.
And talk about what happens
with amalgam in the mouth.
And this is the old
mercury fillings.
>>ADAMS: Well, this was a
real turning point for me,
I have to say.
I did seven years,
I spent seven years
at dental school, two of the
best dental schools reputedly
in the world.
And I actually wanted to
study the effects of amalgam
for my master's degree.
And I wasn't
discouraged, but I just
received absolutely no feedback
until it got to the point
where I realized that I had
to choose another topic.
So I believed, really,
what we were told,
which is that mercury
is all bound up.
Amalgam fillings, just for those
that don't know, are 50% liquid
mercury, 50% other
powdered metals
such as copper, tin,
zinc, and silver.
And they're mixed up.
It's a kind of paste.
It sets pretty quickly.
It's inserted into the tooth.
And what the authorities
have always maintained
is that mercury isn't a
problem because it's all
bound up by the other metals.
It forms a complex
and only tiny amounts
are released by the
amalgam fillings.
And I went along with that.
And then I saw the
smoking tooth video,
and I couldn't,
couldn't let that go.
Couldn't dispute
what I was seeing.
As for what the
smoking tooth video is,
I think it's a tooth that
was extracted 25 years
previously with an
amalgam filling.
And what they've
done is they've just
warmed the surface of
the amalgam a little bit
by rubbing it with what
you would call an eraser.
>>REGINA: Which would
be kind of like when
we're drinking hot liquids?
>>ADAMS: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Like coffee
or tea in the morning.
>>ADAMS: Or you're eating
something hot or whatever.
I mean, the amalgam's
can get stimulated
in all sorts of ways, actually
by electromagnetic radiation
and chewing.
All sorts of things.
And what they've done is
they've just photographed it
against a phosphorescent screen.
And you can see mercury
vapor absolutely
pouring out of this tooth.
>>REGINA: This is 25 years
after the tooth was extracted?
>>ADAMS: Yes.
And it's probably lost
most of its mercury
by then, because
they lose about 80%
of their original mercury
content after 20 years.
So that filling is on the tail
end of its mercury release.
>>REGINA: And you,
as an example,
had 13 of these put in your
mouth within three months.
>>ADAMS: On attend to
dental school, yeah.
But I had more
fillings than that.
>>REGINA: And you had
more fillings than that.
But you also saw a
precipitous downturn
in your already failing
health at that point?
>>ADAMS: Yes, I did.
Yes.
>>REGINA: OK.
So let's talk about
some of the problems.
And we don't need
to stay on this
too long, because now
they're being replaced
by composite fillings,
which we will go on to.
But some of the problems that
have occurred historically
with chronic disease in us
as a result of these mercury
fillings.
>>ADAMS: When I
first of all accepted
that it was a problem in
me, because I was a dentist.
And then I, as I say,
started to realize
it was a problem in everyone
whether it's been detected
or not.
And that's the other
thing, is it often
doesn't get picked
up by blood tests,
hair tests, urine tests, all
of those sorts of things.
Because it's actually hidden
away in body compartments,
hidden away in cell
organelles, et cetera.
>>REGINA: Where does
it tend to hide?
>>ADAMS: It adheres
to the mitochondria.
In the cells, for
those who don't know,
that's actually the
kind of little energy
factory in every cell.
And so that's catastrophic.
>>REGINA: Because it devitalizes
your energy production?
>>ADAMS: You get
chronic fatigue.
You also can't process things.
You can build up of toxic
waste in the tissues.
You get fibromyalgia.
I've lost track now.
Where are we?
>>REGINA: Oh, I
just wanted to know
some of the chronic diseases
that have now been attributed
to the mercury vapors before
we go on to composite fillings.
>>ADAMS: Now, I was looking
at something the other day.
And the man who literally
wrote the book on amalgam,
it's a 22,000 page tome.
So that gives you some idea
of the complexity of it.
But the thing about
mercury is it's liquid,
which unlike any other metal,
and it can form a gas, a vapor,
at body temperature
and pressure.
So those are the two things.
It's also second
only to plutonium.
It's the most toxic
substance known to man.
And that's in its
elemental form.
When it gets
converted in the body,
as it does into other forms,
into its organic forms
by bacteria in the gut or
by liver detoxification,
it can be 100 to 1000
times more toxic.
>>REGINA: It's
amazing any of us are
walking around and
functioning at all.
>>ADAMS: Exactly.
Well, that's a testament
to what the body does.
I mean, this is nuclear waste
as far as the body's concerned.
>>REGINA: This is amazing.
>>ADAMS: It just
managed to tuck it away.
But it does accumulate in
the central nervous system.
I'm very much convinced that
multiple sclerosis, ALS,
the Alzheimer's, dementias--
both of my parents
have ended up with dementia
at the end of their lives,
or very much.
There's a big mercury component.
And the other
thing about mercury
is it's very synergistic
with other toxins as well.
So it can make other toxins
100 times more potent.
So you've got this
real toxic brew.
The thing is, though, if you
address the mercury, if you
pull the mercury out,
the body can actually
sort a lot of the
other stuff out.
>>REGINA: OK, let's go ahead.
Because anyone who has
any mercury remaining
in their mouth
that's listening to
this probably has been
inspired to do that by now.
So let's talk about the
process of having it
removed, and then how the
body on a cellular level
can start recovering from the
remnants of what has already
been left behind.
>>ADAMS: Well, the good
news is that it can.
As long as there is breath
in your body, there's hope.
But it does need to be
managed incredibly carefully
because, as I say, it is
just such potent toxin.
And I think if it's
not managed carefully,
it does have the
potential to kill you
or to make you-- I certainly
know many people who
have been made a
great deal sicker.
>>REGINA: By having them
removed because you're
disturbing and opening
all this-- yeah?
>>ADAMS: Well, just in the
act of having them removed,
it doesn't matter how
carefully it's done.
You will get a big extra
bonus dose of mercury.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ADAMS: You will get a
spike in your blood levels
for several months.
And what they used to think
was that's how long it
took to be excreted, but
I think that's how long it
takes to be stored.
I think mostly it's
just being stored.
>>REGINA: So you need to
find a bio dentist first
of all where you have
your oxygen mask on,
everything's dammed off,
everybody has masks on.
>>ADAMS: Yep.
>>REGINA: And that
will take care
of at least the first burst
of having this stuff removed.
Then what happens?
>>ADAMS: Well, some people
do it in different ways.
Some people think that you
should maybe space them,
removals, over a period of
months or years or whatever.
Some dentists actually
use intravenous sedation
or something like that,
just get all of it out,
put temporary fillings
in then come back
and you can sort the
rest out without all
the super precautions
and everything.
But yes.
You're very right.
You do need a bio dentist.
Often if you're sick
before you even start,
it means that all your organs
of excretion and things
are just completely
overwhelmed and you
need to actually
detoxify significantly
before you even think about--
>>REGINA: I know you're
really big on Chlorella.
>>ADAMS: Yes.
Chlorella is great.
It binds the mercury in the gut.
What I would say is that I
think a lot of naturopaths
are very keen on
intravenous chelation.
But a lot of that would
pull the mercury out
through the kidneys.
And the kidneys take an awful
lot of punishment from mercury.
Within a month of placing
the first amalgam fillings--
these experiments that have
been done on animals-- kidney
function's 50%.
So that's one filling.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
So let's say we don't go
with intravenous chelation,
and we're going to do
it at home by ourselves
in a way that's more natural.
So we need to start
taking the green,
the elements like Chlorella.
>>ADAMS: Yes.
Chlorella's the
best of the green.
>>REGINA: Better than
Spirulina and the others?
>>ADAMS: Spirulina works,
but it's not as effective.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>ADAMS: There's also clays.
You can use pyrophyllite
clays and bentonite clays.
Again, mercury has
a positive charge
and the clays all have
a negative charge.
Same with the Chlorella really.
And it just pulls it all out.
And the gut has
a huge-- it's got
two tennis courts
of surface area.
So you've got a big area for
absorption of toxins there.
The other issue is that
a lot of the mercury
actually gets recirculated
within the body.
So it goes into
the bile, it gets
released into the intestine
and then it gets reabsorbed.
So it just kind of going around
in this little recycling.
So if you have stuff in the
gut, it's actually binding it up
and it's carrying
it out of the body
rather than letting
it being reabsorbed.
>>REGINA: OK.
So Chlorella and bentonite
clay are a good place to begin.
And also, because we
have so many other things
we need to talk about
before we finish this hour,
you have detailed this in your
book, "The Natural Recovery
Plan," and on your website.
So there are
resources you can go
to get the entire
protocol for this if you
want to begin the process.
>>ADAMS: And it is
important to be informed.
It really is.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
OK.
So now let's go on
to restorative work.
Well, let's talk
about composites.
I assume they're
quite a bit better?
>>ADAMS: I would say
broadly speaking, yes.
Because they're not mercury
and they're not metal.
I mean, there's several
problems that amalgam poses.
One is it's a metal,
and all metals
are galvanically active when
you put them in the mouth.
And amalgam can be
galvanically active
between the different
elements of the amalgam
and also with the other
metals in the mouth.
So your partial denture, your
crown, your orthodontic wires.
All of that.
Your implants.
So they're electrically active.
And as we say, they
all lie on meridians.
So they're firing off
into the meridians.
Also they act as a dam
on the meridian as well.
>>REGINA: So it
stops that energy
from flowing through the mouth
and the systems as it needs to.
>>ADAMS: Exactly.
And they corrode.
There's all sorts of
problems with metals.
So composite isn't metal.
Having said that composite,
for those that don't know,
is actually made up of
glass beads, aluminum oxide.
So purists say you
shouldn't use it
because it contains aluminum.
And they're in a
plastic kind of matrix.
But composite is
by no means ideal.
There are issues around
composite as well.
It contains BPA, which is
an estrogenic chemical,
and there are
concerns around that.
Mostly the non-filled ones
actually, I have to say.
The ones that are
used for fish sealants
on children and
that sort of thing,
more so than the fillings.
But I think on a
scale of horrors
that composite is definitely
significantly better
than amalgam.
>>REGINA: What's the best?
>>ADAMS: Well, I think
you need to be tested.
Because what's best is
what's best for you.
And you even need to get
a kinesiologist to test
or your dentist
should be testing,
or you can get the
real laboratory test.
>>REGINA: Well, what are the
other options after composite?
>>ADAMS: Well, there's ceramics.
There's also kind of heat cured
plastics and things like that.
Those are made in a laboratory.
And if you can afford it and
if your dentist has at all
suggesting that it might
be a good thing to do,
I think those are probably
the better way to go,
although there's
more upfront cost.
>>REGINA: What is that?
>>ADAMS: What-- sorry?
>>REGINA: What would
be a better way to go?
>>ADAMS: Oh, to actually have
laboratory made restorations
that are actually
cemented into place.
>>REGINA: I see.
>>ADAMS: Either
ceramics or the there
are some that are heat-cured.
>>REGINA: Right.
Zirconium.
>>ADAMS: The zirconium as
well, that's fairly new.
>>REGINA: Fairly new, yes.
>>ADAMS: Yes.
That's a ceramic.
It's zirconium oxide
and there's a cast,
and then they have
porcelains put over the top.
So those all seem
to be a lot better,
because you haven't got
the galvanic issues.
You haven't got the
meridian blockage.
>>REGINA: The other
chemicals that
are embedded within
the composite?
>>ADAMS: Yes.
Exactly.
>>REGINA: It's more
aggressive, but is also
is safer, you're
saying, in the long run.
It is quite a bit
more expensive,
and people need to take
that into consideration.
So now let's talk about what
happens when a tooth goes bad
and we have an
abscess and we do what
is commonly called a root canal?
>>ADAMS: Yes.
Well, root canals.
I described the anatomy
of the tooth before.
And the idea behind
a root canal is
that you clean out the canals
inside the root of the tooth,
if the decay has actually
reached the root or a crack
has reached the pulp, rather,
and the nerve is dying
or has died.
So the idea is
that you clean out
the dead space or necrotic
tissue within the tooth
and seal it and fill it all up.
And I certainly
as a dentist, when
I was working as
a dentist, thought
that if you did your level
best to get the tooth cleaned
out and filled up,
that the body could
kind of take care of the rest.
And that's certainly what
seems to happen on x-ray,
and that's what most
dentists believe happen.
The trouble with root canals
is it's almost impossible
to clean the root
canal system out,
because it's never like
they draw it on a diagram.
It's really complex.
There's lots of
accessory canals.
There's lots of lateral canals.
The canals, there's two
or three maybe in a root
and they all intercommunicate.
It's just not possible to clean
the root canal system out.
And they do try.
They use ultrasonics
and flush the thing out
and they seal stuff
in and what have you.
But number one, that's
just not possible.
But the really big
problem with root canals
is the structure of the dentin,
which we mentioned earlier,
but it's tubular.
And when the tooth has
died, the odontoblasts,
which were the cells that were
maintaining the dentin, die.
And when that happens, and
when a root filling's done,
what happens is that you are
actually severing off the blood
supply to the tooth or it
has already been severed.
So you're actually changing the
conditions inside the tooth,
and the tooth is
actually anaerobic.
And under those conditions,
the bacteria actually
morph into their
anaerobic forms.
They multiply much
more prolifically
and they produce really super
noxious toxins, thioethers
and things like that,
which are 1,000 times more
toxic than botulinum
toxin, which
is the most toxic
biological toxin known.
>>REGINA: So would
that mean that when
you have a tooth that has gone
through the root canal process,
you're more likely to have,
then, bone loss in that area,
for example?
>>ADAMS: You could
have bone loss.
And that actually
might perversely
be a sign that your body
was actually responding
and that your immune system--
>>REGINA: Really?
>>ADAMS: Yes.
>>REGINA: What would be
the other symptomology
if not bone loss
around this tooth?
>>ADAMS: Well, there
often is no symptom.
That's the problem.
But what happens is that the
whole area around the tooth
is full of these really noxious
bacteria, full of their toxins.
And that as you chew
there's actually
a pumping of all this
stuff into the circulation,
into the lymphatics.
So there may be no
local symptom at all.
But you may have migraines,
you may have arthritis,
you may have breast cancer, you
may have any number of things.
>>REGINA: And that's
something that I've
been reading more about lately
is root canals and breast
cancer.
>>ADAMS: Very big link, yes.
>>REGINA: So how is that linked?
>>ADAMS: Well,
this link has been
noticed by a lot of people,
that a lot of people
who have breast cancer
have got a root canal.
>>REGINA: There are German
studies also in particular.
>>ADAMS: There is, yes.
Well, there's a doctor
called Thomas Rau who
runs the Paracelsus
clinic in Switzerland.
And he's actually
a medical doctor,
but it's a kind of holistic
dental and medical center.
It's a big place.
They take care of both aspects
for people who are usually
pretty chronically
sick or seriously ill.
And he looked back over the
last 150 cases of breast cancer,
and he found that
97% of them had all
had a root canal on the meridian
that governs the breast.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Yes.
Yes, I've been
reading about this.
>>ADAMS: Huge link.
>>REGINA: So this is really big.
So, OK.
The tooth has an abscess.
You can't live with it.
What happens?
What would you recommend?
And again, this is
not one size fits all.
We understand that.
I'm not saying to
diagnose people from here
through their television screen
or their computer screen.
But generally
speaking, what do you
do when you have an
abscess in the tooth?
>>ADAMS: Well, Weston
Price did a lot of work.
He actually-- it was
rather a sad story--
because he did a root canal
on his only child, Douglas,
and he died as result
of the root canal
that Weston Price did.
And that's what launched
him into his investigation
of this matter.
And he spent 25 years
heading up a 60 man
team looking into this.
And he produced just
tomes and tomes of work
on this, which was kind of
buried after his death, really.
Sorry, I've lost the--
>>REGINA: So what do we do then?
>>ADAMS: What do we do.
Right.
>>REGINA: We have a
tooth that screaming.
It's abscessed.
What do we do?
>>ADAMS: One of
the studies he did
was he took fragments of
the root canal filled tooth
from people with known
diseases and implanted them
into rabbits.
And he did this a
successive number of times.
And he found that the
diseases that the person had
were transferable
100% to the animal.
So that if they'd had kidney
disease or heart disease,
then the rabbit got kidney
disease or heart disease
and died within a
couple of weeks.
So there's a very strong link.
And it seems to
be more the toxins
that the bacteria are producing
than the actual bacteria
themselves.
He also found that some people,
about a quarter of people,
can tolerate root canals or
seem to be able to if they've
got a history of robust
good health in their family,
but only up to a certain point.
Sometimes they're
fine until there's
another stressor
put on the system.
So you know, a
partner dies or they
lost their job or whatever.
And then all of a sudden
that becomes an issue.
Their immune system
can't contain it anymore.
And whatever.
So some people do seem to
be able to live with them.
However, if you've had a
history of degenerative illness
over the last two
generations, especially
if it involved the kidneys,
his strong recommendation
was you got the teeth out.
There's another
dentist now who's
kind of inherited his work,
Dr. Hal Huggins, who's
a big anti-amalgam dentist.
And he's done a lot
of laboratory work.
I have to say, a
lot of this work
has been confirmed
by people recently
with modern techniques, so
not just looking back 70 years
or whatever.
But he's done a lot of work.
And I know his
strong recommendation
is that you get root
canal filled teeth out.
All of them.
>>REGINA: And then
you're down to having
to have bridges,
false teeth, implants.
And so we know about bridges.
I mean, people kind of
understand how that goes.
You have to have teeth on
either side kind of filed down.
And you put the-- we
used to call them caps--
but you put the--
what do you call them?
>>ADAMS: Bridge.
>>REGINA: Well, the bridge.
Yeah.
The two teeth on the side,
and then the one in the middle
is kind of bridged,
the others holding it.
So you do that.
And that's OK.
You can have a partial, have a
whole lot of teeth pulled down
and a plate that goes up
there and holds the teeth in
or all your teeth out, and have
two plates that are your teeth.
Or you can have an implant.
And now implants are
becoming very popular.
Let's talk about what
happens with implants.
>>ADAMS: I'm wrestling with this
one at the moment, actually.
I should just add
that you don't just
want to get the root filled
tooth just extracted,
because you're leaving
the membrane and all
the affected bone behind.
So you need to see
a biological dentist
and have that looked at,
properly cleaned out.
Intravenous vitamin C, maybe
ozone, all sorts of things,
homeopathics to make
sure it heals properly.
>>REGINA: So it's done properly.
The tooth is out.
And we have options.
And a lot of people
are gravitating now
to having implants done.
>>ADAMS: Yes.
Well, the vast
majority of implants
are made out of titanium, so
you're back on the metals thing
here.
And the body does seem to
tolerate them fairly well.
But they also do
produce oxides which
we know are found in
the surrounding tissues,
are found in the meridian that
that tooth's on, et cetera.
So I have got some
root filled teeth
which I'm looking to address.
And I won't be going down
the titanium implant route.
The other issue you're
looking at with implants
is you're implanting
something foreign in the body.
Number one.
And number two, it's
actually perforating
the outer protective
surface of the body, really.
So you've got the most
heavily populated part
of the body, the mouth.
So you've got the bacteria there
which actually can get access
to the bone,
directly to the bone
down the surface of the implant.
You've also got the fact
that the immune system will
be trying to defend itself
from this foreign body.
And over time that may
result in autoimmune disease
or chronic fatigue or
something like that,
or some kind of immune failure,
which results in cancer.
You also got the fact that the
surface, any implanted surface
in the body can act as a surface
for the growth of biofilms.
And now it's thought that
80% of infections in humans
are actually biofilm
in origin, which
is where bacteria actually
colonize a surface.
They put up a protective
canopy, if you like.
And then they
actually communicate.
So they exchange information.
So you've got a whole little--
>>REGINA: And it's
highly adaptable.
>>ADAMS: Highly adaptable.
>>REGINA: Great survival rates.
Biofilm are survivors.
>>ADAMS: Exactly.
So you've got all those
things to factor in as well.
There is the alternative
zirconium implants,
that, again, overcomes a
lot of the metal issues
to do with galvanism,
electricity, blocking
the meridians.
It doesn't appear to
block the meridians.
And some people
tolerate that well.
I know Hall Huggins, he's
done analysis of the biofilms
and things on zirconium
implants, and he's not a fan.
So at the end of the day, it's
a choice of lesser evils really,
I think.
Because a lot of
the other options
you mentioned, they're using
metals, plates, and bridges.
>>REGINA: OK.
So let's talk about
the most ideal, least
disruptive to our
health option then.
Say you have two or three
teeth that have to go.
What would you do?
>>ADAMS: Depends where they are.
Sometimes you can just leave it.
>>REGINA: Let's say you're
taking out a root canal, teeth
with root canals
included in that.
>>ADAMS: So sometimes
leaving the gap is an option
if the other teeth aren't good
to move around or overerupt,
whatever.
Obviously if you're losing a
central incisor or something
like that, it's not an option.
>>REGINA: No.
No.
>>ADAMS: For most people.
I think you need to go and
see somebody who's informed.
You need to be
informed yourself.
So read up and find
out about these things.
And you probably need
to be muscle tested
or to have to some
biocompatibility testing done
for whatever material you're
planning to put in there.
I personally don't want
in metals in my mouth.
As you know, I was
hit by a motor bike
and I got a broken leg
a couple of years ago.
And I've actually just gone
through elective major surgery
to get the metal
rod out of my leg
because I don't want
metals in my body.
I just don't.
>>REGINA: Right.
I mean, that's one lesson you've
learned out of all of this,
is if there's any way to get
the metals out of your body,
get them out.
>>ADAMS: Yes.
And because the thing is
that the crown in your mouth
is interacting with your
hip prosthesis or your knee.
>>REGINA: The metals
are communicating.
>>ADAMS: Exactly.
You are just a bag of saline
with two metal implants.
>>REGINA: OK.
Well, we have only a couple
of minutes left here.
Just really briefly, the new
type of x-rays, a lot of people
are afraid of
radiation, justifiably.
But what's happening with the
newest kinds of x-ray machines
now?
>>ADAMS: Well, they've
improved massively.
They're digital now.
Well, not in all dental
surgeries, but it's coming in.
They use about a
tenth of the radiation
of the previous x-rays.
And also the images can be
manipulated on the computer,
and so you can increase contrast
and color and everything.
So you can actually
perceive more information.
>>REGINA: So they're not
as bad as they used to be.
>>ADAMS: They're not as
bad as they used to be.
But still, it shouldn't
be taken recklessly.
>>REGINA: Yes or no.
Fluoride?
>>ADAMS: No.
>>REGINA: In your toothpaste,
in your drinking water?
No.
>>ADAMS: No.
>>REGINA: We don't
have time to go
into that right now,
but a no on that.
>>ADAMS: An absolute no, yes.
>>REGINA: We're just
about out of time.
But Allison, I can't
thank you enough.
I think we've all learned
a tremendous amount
about our teeth
today and how it's
interconnected with
the rest of our health
and our vital
systems and organs.
And thank you so much for taking
the time to come be with us.
>>ADAMS: Well,
you're most welcome.
And I do hope that this
information gets out there,
because I think it's
really crucially
important, and especially for
the next generation as well.
>>REGINA: Couldn't agree more.
>>ADAMS: For parents making
choices about their children.
>>REGINA: Thank you so much.
>>ADAMS: You're welcome.
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]